Flow witness conversion discipline

Context

The first trace conversions proved that JSONL emission and strict artifact
reading work mechanically. They also exposed a risk: it is easy to make the
flow graph bigger without making it more truthful.

For example, this edge is valid trace-v1:

  check.opacity-normalization -> sink.domain-law

It is well formed, reachable, and terminal. The audit should accept it as a
static or pure-law witness. But it is not a user flow, and it does not prove
that any application, adapter, shell, or browser composition edge exists.

That means conversion needs a discipline. The goal is not "every test emits
some edge". The goal is:

  converted tests preserve the strongest real boundary they already witness

The trace artifact should make the test's evidence visible. It should not add a
parallel story that is stronger than the behavior the test actually exercised.

Test kinds

Before converting a test, classify it.

1. architecture/static

   Source scans, dependency guards, vocabulary bans, file-shape checks, manifest
   derivation checks, and other tests that inspect artifacts rather than execute
   product behavior.

   These may start with check.* and may terminate directly:

     check.bootstrap-product-boundary -> sink.architecture-boundary

   These are evidence witnesses, not behavioral flows.

2. domain law

   Pure domain invariants over values: geometry, opacity, registration solve,
   image-size policy. They do not cross the application boundary.

   These may start with check.* and terminate directly:

     check.registration-solve -> sink.domain-law

   They should not pretend to be command, adapter, or user flows.

3. application transition

   Application command in; state and effects out. These should use command.*
   when the test actually constructs and handles a semantic application command.

   Good:

     command.select-mode -> sink.application-state
     command.select-mode -> effect.persist-durable-state

   If the test is only checking determinism or plain-data shape, use check.*:

     check.application-determinism -> sink.application-state

4. adapter boundary

   Browser, DOM, page, storage, timer, or UI mechanics become semantic facts,
   commands, port calls, callbacks, or terminal host results.

   Good:

     source.panel.trace.click -> command.select-mode
     source.keyboard.escape.keydown -> callback.interaction-fact.trace-mode-requested
     port.timer.schedule-application-command -> callback.timer.status-notice

   Avoid replacing real adapter input with a direct command dispatch unless the
   test is explicitly below the adapter boundary.

5. shell integration

   Bootstrap/runtime composition connects rendered commands, application
   effects, ports, callbacks, durable writes, renders, host errors, and
   disposal.

   Good:

     source.rendered-command.select-mode -> command.select-mode
     effect.persist-durable-state -> port.durable-state.write
     port.durable-state.write -> sink.durable-state.write
     source.rendered-command.select-mode -> sink.render

6. user flow

   A user-observable path through multiple boundaries, ideally from rendered DOM
   or browser event to a user-visible sink.

   Good:

     source.panel.primary.click
       -> command.activate-primary-action
       -> effect.request-reference-image-input
       -> port.reference-image-input.start
       -> resource.paste-listener.active
       -> callback.paste-event
       -> sink.durable-state.write
       -> sink.overlay-image.painted

   These are the traces that can expose missing composition edges.

Normative rules

1. Do not strengthen the evidence by narration

   The trace must not claim a boundary that the test did not exercise.

   Bad:

     trace.edge(source.panel.trace.click -> command.select-mode)
     await host.latestRender.dispatchCommand({ kind: "select-mode", mode: "trace" })

   The test did not click a panel button. It directly dispatched a command.

   Better:

     panelHarness.clickControl(root, "trace")

   where clickControl records the source edge and performs the click.

2. Trace from the primitive that does the work

   Within-test drift happens when traces sit beside behavior as a second script.
   The helper or harness method that performs the action should emit the edge.

   Good:

     storage.writeDurableState(value) records
       port.durable-state.write -> sink.durable-state.write

     input.accept(requestId, outcome) records
       callback.reference-image-input.accepted -> command.report-reference-image-input-outcome

3. Use case identity for behavioral witnesses

   Application, adapter, shell, and user-flow witnesses should normally carry a
   case field. This prevents a node in one scenario from being accidentally
   closed by another scenario in the same file or artifact.

   Architecture/static and simple domain-law witnesses may omit case when they
   are single-edge checks.

4. Use source/check roots intentionally

   source.* means an external or harness entry into behavior.

   check.* means inspection or invariant checking.

   Do not use check.* to avoid tracing a real source. If a test starts from a
   rendered click, key event, wheel event, paste event, timer callback, storage
   read, or bootstrap call, the root should normally be source.* or port.*,
   not check.*.

5. Sinks must be boundary observables

   Good sinks:

     sink.application-state
     sink.declared-effects
     sink.durable-state.write
     sink.panel-dom
     sink.overlay-dom
     sink.overlay-image.painted
     sink.render
     sink.host-error
     sink.architecture-boundary
     sink.domain-law

   Avoid vague terminals such as:

     sink.test-passed
     sink.assertion
     sink.ok

6. Effects must either continue or terminate honestly

   If a witness emits an application effect, then either:

   - continue to the port or handler that consumes it, or
   - use a terminal sink representing the effect list as the observable boundary.

   Good application-level boundary:

     command.select-mode -> sink.application-state
     command.select-mode -> sink.declared-effects

   Good shell-level boundary:

     command.select-mode -> effect.persist-durable-state
     effect.persist-durable-state -> port.durable-state.write
     port.durable-state.write -> sink.durable-state.write

   Bad:

     command.select-mode -> effect.persist-durable-state

   with no effect consumer and no terminal.

7. Resource lifetimes are instance-scoped

   Anything live, pending, armed, registered, or installed is resource.* and
   needs case and resource identity.

   Good:

     port.paste-listener.add -> resource.paste-listener.active
     resource.paste-listener.active -> callback.paste-event
     resource.paste-listener.active -> sink.paste-listener.disposed

   "Active" is not terminal. It must resolve inside the witness case.

8. Provider and surface are evidence strength, not decoration

   provider says who supplied the edge. surface says where the evidence came
   from.

   Examples:

     provider: panel-adapter
     provider: browser-shell-effect-handler
     provider: harness-injected
     surface: extension-content
     surface: shell-harness
     surface: browser-adapter

   A harness-injected port and a content-entrypoint-created port are not the
   same strength of evidence. Preserve the distinction.

9. A converted test may reveal that it is not a flow witness

   If the strongest honest trace is:

     check.some-static-rule -> sink.architecture-boundary

   then the test may still be valuable, but it is not evidence that a user flow
   closes. Do not count it as flow coverage.

   Possible outcomes:

   - keep it as a static flow-witness because the artifact authority still
     benefits from seeing the check
   - leave it as a normal test if trace emission adds no value
   - strengthen it to exercise a real boundary
   - demote or delete it if it no longer provides useful evidence

Audit implications

The audit should remain the convention carrier, but it should not become a
central product flow spec. It may enforce generic discipline:

- check.* roots are acceptable for architecture/static and domain-law files
- behavioral witnesses with command.*, effect.*, port.*, callback.*, resource.*,
  or source.* should normally carry case
- resource nodes require resource identity and same-case resolution
- terminal sinks must be specific and known
- repeated edge evidence needs phase
- emitted obligations need matching fulfillments

The audit should not contain a checklist of product flows such as "paste must
paint" or "Trace must solve registration". Those belong in local witnesses.

Pass meaning after disciplined conversion

A passing audit means:

  every emitted witness graph is strict, closed, scoped, and honest under the
  trace convention

It still does not mean:

  every important user flow has a witness

That second question needs a separate review of witness inventory and evidence
strength. The audit can make weak evidence visible; it cannot invent missing
behavioral witnesses.

Practical conversion checklist

For each test:

1. Classify the test kind.
2. Name the real boundary the test already exercises.
3. Pick the strongest honest root: source.*, check.*, command.*, port.*, or
   view.*.
4. Emit trace edges from helpers or harness primitives where possible.
5. Add case/resource/request identity when behavior is scoped.
6. Continue non-terminal nodes to the next real boundary, or terminate at a
   specific observable sink.
7. Keep the original assertions.
8. Run the test normally.
9. Run the test with FLOW_TRACE_DIR and then the artifact audit.
10. If the trace is trivial, say so. Do not count it as user-flow coverage.

The core rule

  A converted test should make the graph more truthful, not just bigger.
